>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JANUARY 17: NEW
SECURITY MEASURES GO INTO EFFECT
THROUGHOUT WESTERN EUROPE; ANGER
IN NORTH MIAMI OVER THE USE OF
IMAGES OF AFRICAN AMERICANS IN
SNIPER TRAINING PRACTICE; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WE'LL
TAKE YOU TO A COUNTRY WITH
THE LEAST RESTRICTIVE ASSISTED
SUICIDE LAWS IN THE WORLD.
IS IT A MODEL FOR THE UNITED
STATES OR A PLAN THAT'S GONE WAY
TOO FAR?
>> DOCTOR, HOW MANY EUTHANASIAS
HAVE YOU PERFORMED YOURSELF?
>> MORE THAN 100.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WESTERN EUROPE REMAINS ON HIGH
ALERT FOLLOWING THE TWIN TERROR
ATTACKS IN FRANCE AND THE FOILED
TERROR PLOT IN BELGIUM.
IN ATHENS TODAY, AUTHORITIES
ARRESTED FOUR MEN REPORTEDLY
INVOLVED IN THE THWARTED ATTACK
ON BELGIAN POLICE.
IN YEMEN, WHERE THE TERROR
ATTACKS AGAINST FRANCE WERE
HATCHED, THE PRESIDENT'S CHIEF
OF STAFF WAS KIDNAPPED BY
GUNMEN.
AND PROTESTS CONTINUED TODAY
AROUND THE WORLD OVER CARTOON
DEPICTIONS OF THE PROPHET
MUHAMMED.
THIS WAS THE SCENE IN NIGER IN
WEST AFRICA, A FORMER FRENCH
COLONY AND MAJORITY MUSLIM
COUNTRY, WHERE DEMONSTRATORS SET
FIRE TO CHURCHES AND LOOTED
SHOPS.
AT LEAST EIGHT PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED THERE DURING PROTESTS
OVER THE PAST TWO DAYS.
THOUSANDS ALSO TOOK PART IN
PROTESTS TODAY IN PAKISTAN,
WHERE SOME DEMONSTRATORS BURNED
THE FRENCH, ISRAELI AND AMERICAN
FLAGS AND HELD SIGNS DENOUNCING
THE DEPICTIONS AS BLASPHEMY.
>> (translated): LOOK AT THE
DOUBLE STANDARDS OF THE WEST,
WHERE SAYING CERTAIN THINGS
ABOUT THE HOLOCAUST OR AGAINST
THE QUEEN OF ENGLAND IS A CRIME.
BUT WHEN BLASPHEMY IS COMMITTED
AGAINST THE PROPHET MUHAMMAD,
THEY SAY IT IS FREEDOM OF
SPEECH.
>> Sreenivasan: IN FRANCE TODAY,
PRESIDENT FRANCOIS HOLLANDE
SAID, QUOTING NOW, "FRANCE HAS
PRINCIPLES AND VALUES, IN
PARTICULAR FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION."
ALL THROUGHOUT EUROPE,
GOVERNMENTS ARE TIGHTENING
SECURITY MEASURES.
I.T.N.'S RICHARD PALLOT HAS MORE
ON THE SITUATION IN BELGIUM AND
IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
>> Reporter: AS INVESTIGATIONS
CONTINUE AT THE SCENE OF
THURSDAY'S SHOOTOUT, THE
BELGIUM GOVERNMENT ADMIT THEY
DON'T KNOW IF THIS WAS PART OF A
WIDER PLOT BUT THAT THE POLICE
DO NEED HELP.
THE BELGIUM DEFENSE MINISTER
SAYING THIS WASN'T A SIMPLE
DECISION, BUT IT WAS NECESSARY
AT A TIME WHEN THE POLICE ARE
OVERRUN FOR THE ARMY TO GET
INVOLVED.
IN THE U.K., PATROLS HAVE ALSO
BEEN INCREASED TODAY IN MANY
JEWISH AREAS.
THERE REMAINS NO SPECIFIC
INTELLIGENCE ABOUT ANY
PARTICULAR PLOTS ON BRITISH
SOIL, BUT ONE JEWISH CHARITY
SAYS THEY'VE HAD AN
UNPRECEDENTED NUMBER OF CALLS
FROM THOSE WORRIED OF A REPEAT.
AT THIS SYNAGOGUE IN NORTH
LONDON, THERE WERE PLENTY
CELEBRATING THE SABBATH, THE
RELIGION'S MOST HOLY DAY, AS
USUAL, BUT NOT EVERYONE IS QUITE
AS CONFIDENT.
>> PARENTS ARE VERY ANXIOUS.
THEY'VE BEEN CALLING, AND
THEY'RE VERY CONCERNED ABOUT
SENDING THEIR CHILDREN ON SUNDAY
MORNING TO LEARN.
BUT WE'VE BEEN... WE'VE ASSURED
THEM THAT WE HAVE DONE
EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO ASSURE
THE SAFETY AND SECURITY OF THEIR
CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST SABBATH
SINCE SECURITY WAS STEPPED UP IN
THE U.K. IS PASSING WITHOUT
INCIDENT.
BUT WITH WARNINGS AN ATTACK
CANNOT BE RULED OUT, THE JEWISH
COMMUNITY HERE REMAIN ON THE
HIGHEST OF ALERT.
RICHARD PALLOT, I.T.V. NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE LATEST
ABOUT STEPPED-UP SECURITY IN
BELGIUM, WE ARE JOINED NOW VIA
SKYPE FROM BRUSSELS BY MATTHEW
DALTON.
HE IS A REPORTER WITH THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
SO, MATTHEW, IT'S BEEN DECADES
SINCE WE SAW MILITARY ON THE
STREETS OF BELGIUM.
WHERE ARE THESE TROOPS AND WHY?
>> WELL, THEY'RE POSITIONED
THROUGHOUT THE CITY IN CERTAIN
STRATEGIC PLACES-- AROUND
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS,
MINISTRIES-- AND THE REASON IS
BECAUSE OF THIS PLOT THAT WAS
DISRUPTED ON THURSDAY EVENING.
THE PLOTTERS WANTED TO KILL
POLICEMEN.
THAT WAS THE PURPOSE OF THEIR
PLOT.
THEY HAD POLICE UNIFORMS.
THEY HAD EXPLOSIVES.
THEY HAD KALISHNIKOVS.
IT WAS MORE THAN 13 PEOPLE
INVOLVED IN THE PLOT.
IT WAS A FAIRLY SOPHISTICATED,
AMBITIOUS EFFORT TO TRY AND KILL
PEOPLE, KILL POLICEMEN ON THE
STREET AND IN POLICE STATIONS.
SO, THEY'RE NOT... THEY BELIEVE
THAT THEY'VE ROUNDED UP THE
PLOT... THEY'VE ROUNDED UP ALL
THE PLOTTERS, BUT THIS IS MORE
OF A PRECAUTIONARY EFFORT TO
MAKE SURE THAT IF THEY'VE MISSED
ANYBODY, THAT THEY HAVE ENOUGH
FIREPOWER IN PLACE TO FIGHT
THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW IS IT
AFFECTING THE MOOD ON THE
STREETS TO SEE THIS MILITARY
PRESENCE, TO HEAR ABOUT THESE
RAIDS HAPPENING?
WHAT ARE PEOPLE THINKING ABOUT,
TALKING ABOUT?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY'RE PRETTY
SHOCKED.
BELGIUM HAS A LARGE MOROCCAN
MINORITY, A LARGE MUSLIM
MINORITY.
BRUSSELS ITSELF IS PROBABLY
AROUND 25% MUSLIM.
BUT THE BELGIANS HAVE LIVED WITH
THIS MINORITY IN PEACE FOR A
LONG TIME AND THERE HAVEN'T
BEEN MAJOR PROBLEMS UNTIL
RECENTLY, UNTIL THE EVENTS IN
THE MIDDLE EAST HAVE REALLY
INFLAMED SENTIMENT AMONG PARTS
OF A MINORITY OF THE MUSLIM
POPULATION.
BUT NEVERTHELESS, YOU'RE STILL
TALKING ABOUT, YOU KNOW, A FEW
HUNDRED PEOPLE, MAYBE MORE THAN
THAT.
SO, I THINK PEOPLE, GENERALLY
SPEAKING, ARE WORRIED ABOUT THE
IDEA OF A MULTICULTURAL STATE
IN BELGIUM.
THAT'S WHAT A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
TALKING ABOUT.
THE SECURITY PRESENCE ITSELF IS
NOT PERVASIVE, I WOULD SAY.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY.
NOW, BELGIUM OFFICIALS HAVE ALSO
SAID THAT ABOUT 350 PEOPLE HAVE
GONE FROM THERE TO FIGHT IN WARS
IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, AND ABOUT 100
OF THEM HAVE COME BACK.
THAT'S AN ENORMOUS NUMBER.
THAT'S THE HIGHEST PER-CAPITA
POPULATION IN EUROPE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE WAS A GROUP... STARTING IN
2010, THERE WAS A GROUP CALLED
SHARIA FOR BELGIUM THAT WAS
FORMED IN RESPONSE TO BELGIAN
EFFORTS TO BAN THE FACE VAIL
THAT MUSLIM WOMEN WEAR.
THEN, STARTING IN ABOUT 2011,
THIS GROUP OF MUSLIM
FUNDAMENTALISTS YOU COULD
CALL THEM, STARTED PLOTTING TO
SEND THEIR MEMBERS TO SYRIA.
SO, THERE ARE MORE THAN 50
PEOPLE ASSOCIATED WITH THIS
GROUP WHO HAVE BEEN SENT TO
SYRIA TO FIGHT.
AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER... THAT
WAS KIND OF THE BEGINNING, THE
FIRST WAVE OF PEOPLE THAT LEFT
FROM BELGIUM.
BUT THE RECRUITMENT HAPPENED
VIA THESE PEOPLE AND VIA OTHERS
THROUGH SOCIAL MEDIA, LARGELY
FACEBOOK, TWITTER, HAS DRAWN
FRIENDS, SOMETIMES FAMILY
MEMBERS, WIVES, CHILDREN, TO
FOLLOW A LOT OF THESE PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MATTHEW DALTON, REPORTER FROM
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
JOINING US LIVE ON SKYPE TODAY
FROM BRUSSELS, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: ELSEWHERE
OVERSEAS, IN TACLOBAN, IN THE
PHILIPPINES, POPE FRANCIS DEFIED
HIGH WINDS AND A DOWNPOUR TO
CELEBRATE AN OUTDOOR MASS FOR A
THRONG OF WORSHIPPERS WHO
SURVIVED THE 2013 TYPHOON THERE.
THE STORM KILLED MORE THAN 7,000
PEOPLE AND DISPLACED MILLIONS
MORE THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY.
BUT A PLANNED MEETING WITH SOME
OF THE SURVIVORS HAD TO BE
CANCELLED BECAUSE OF ANOTHER
APPROACHING TYPHOON.
FIVE MEN AFFILIATED WITH THE
TALIBAN HAVE BEEN ARRESTED IN
CONNECTION WITH THAT MASSACRE
LAST MONTH AT A MILITARY SCHOOL
IN PAKISTAN.
THE ATTACK LEFT 150 PEOPLE DEAD,
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEM
CHILDREN.
THE FIVE WERE CAPTURED BY
SECURITY FORCES IN NEIGHBORING
AFGHANISTAN, NEAR THE BORDER
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES.
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE
SHOOTINGS, LEADERS OF THE TWO
COUNTRIES PLEDGED GREATER
COOPERATION IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
THE INSURGENTS.
AN ARREST IN CONNECTION WITH THE
ABDUCTION AND APPARENT MURDER OF
43 COLLEGE STUDENTS IN MEXICO.
AUTHORITIES THERE SAY THEY
APPREHENDED THE LEADER OF A
MEXICAN ORGANIZED CRIME RING
BELIEVED RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
INCIDENT NEARLY FOUR MONTHS AGO.
FEDERAL MEXICAN AUTHORITIES SAY
LOCAL OFFICIALS WERE COOPERATING
WITH THE CRIME GROUP.
BURNED REMAINS OF ONLY ONE OF
THE STUDENTS HAVE BEEN
IDENTIFIED THUS FAR.
PARENTS OF SOME OF THE MISSING
STUDENTS REMAIN CONVINCED THAT
THEY ARE STILL ALIVE.
POLICE IN NORTH MIAMI HAVE
SUSPENDED A SNIPER TRAINING
PROGRAM AFTER IT WAS REVEALED
THAT THEY USED OLD MUGSHOTS OF
BLACK SUSPECTS DURING TARGET
PRACTICE.
NORTH MIAMI BEACH'S POLICE CHIEF
SAYS THAT NONE OF THE
DEPARTMENT'S POLICIES WERE
VIOLATED AND THAT NO
DISCIPLINARY ACTION WILL BE
TAKEN.
THE CITY SAYS PHOTOS OF WHITES,
HISPANICS AND EVEN OSAMA BIN
LADEN WERE ALSO USED.
THE STORY CAME TO LIGHT AFTER A
MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL GUARD SAW
A BULLET-RIDDLED PICTURE OF HER
BROTHER AT THE GUN RANGE.
THERE WERE MIXED ATTITUDES
TOWARD POLICE IN A NEW
NATIONWIDE SURVEY.
NEARLY 75% OF THOSE POLLED SAY
THEY APPROVE OF THE JOB LOCAL
POLICE ARE DOING, BUT NEARLY A
THIRD OF AMERICANS BELIEVE
POLICE "ROUTINELY LIE TO SERVE
THEIR OWN INTERESTS."
SLIGHTLY MORE THAN HALF OF
AFRICAN-AMERICANS APPROVE OF THE
JOB POLICE ARE DOING AND NEARLY
HALF OF THEM THINK POLICE LIE.
THE SURVEY WAS CONDUCTED JOINTLY
BY REUTERS AND THE IPSOS POLLING
ORGANIZATION.
IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL TODAY,
HUNDREDS TURNED OUT FOR A RALLY
IN SUPPORT OF POLICE.
THE EVENT WAS ORGANIZED BY THE
WIVES OF THREE POLICE OFFICERS.
SOME OF THE DEMONSTRATORS HELD
UP SIGNS SAYING "BLUE LIVES
MATTER."
SIMILAR EVENTS WERE HELD IN
OTHER CITIES AROUND THE COUNTRY.
ANOTHER NEW NATIONWIDE POLL
FINDS AMERICANS INCREASINGLY
CONCERNED ABOUT TERRORISM.
ACCORDING TO PEW, 76% OF THE
PEOPLE IT SURVEYED CALL
TERRORISM "A POLICY PRIORITY"
FOR THE PRESIDENT AND THE NEW
CONGRESS.
THAT WAS JUST BARELY AHEAD OF
THE ECONOMY AS THE TOP PRIORITY.
DURING THE PAST TWO YEARS, THERE
HAS ALSO BEEN A BIG INCREASE IN
THE PERCENTAGE OF AMERICANS
NAMING "STRENGTHENING THE
MILITARY" AS A PRIORITY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL,
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
WORLD ABOUT CRITICAL ISSUES.
TONIGHT, OUR FOCUS IS ON
ASSISTED SUICIDE.
BRITTANY MAYNARD'S DEATH LAST
NOVEMBER REIGNITED THE DEBATE IN
THIS COUNTRY ABOUT THE PRACTICE.
ADVOCATES REFER TO IT AS DEATH
WITH DIGNITY, BUT IT IS ALLOWED
IN ONLY A FEW STATES AND IS
OPPOSED BY MANY RELIGIOUS
GROUPS, INCLUDING THE U.S.
CONFERENCE OF CATHOLIC BISHOPS.
BUT ASSISTED SUICIDE IS MUCH
MORE WIDESPREAD IN THE
PREDOMINANTLY CATHOLIC NATION OF
BELGIUM, AND THERE IT'S NOT JUST
FOR TERMINALLY ILL PATIENTS.
A WARNING: OUR REPORT FROM
BELGIUM BY THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN
THOMPSON CONTAINS IMAGES THAT
SOME MIGHT FIND DIFFICULT TO
WATCH.
>> Reporter: AS SHE OPENS THE
DOOR TO HER HOME, THIS 34-YEAR-
OLD BELGIAN WOMAN KNOWN AS "EVA"
SEEMS AT EASE, BUT ACTUALLY
SHE'S CHRONICALLY DEPRESSED.
MORE THAN ONCE SHE'S TRIED TO
COMMIT SUICIDE, AND NOW SHE'S
ASKING DOCTORS TO HELP HER.
HELP HER DIE BY EUTHANASIA, ALL
OF IT CAPTURED IN A BELGIAN
DOCUMENTARY.
>> (translated): IT MAY SEEM
STRANGE, BUT I AM LOOKING
FORWARD TO THE REST.
THE CHOICE HAS BEEN MADE.
THE DECISION HAS BEEN MADE.
I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO THE REST
I HAVE LONGED FOR, FOR SO LONG.
>> Reporter: IT MAY SOUND
SHOCKING, BUT IN BELGIUM
EUTHANASIA IS QUITE ACCEPTED,
AND IT'S NOT JUST FOR THE
TERMINALLY ILL.
CHRONICALLY DEPRESSED PATIENTS
LIKE EVA CAN REQUEST IT, TOO.
AND SO, ON A DAY AND TIME SHE'S
CHOSEN, EVA SAYS GOODBYE TO HER
FAMILY...
>> (translated): EVA, ARE YOU
READY?
>> (translated): YES, I AM
READY, DOCTOR.
>> Reporter: ...AND THEN LAYS
DOWN ON HER COUCH.
>> (translated): WOULD YOU
LIKE TO SAY SOMETHING TO YOUR
BROTHER AND SISTER-IN-LAW?
>> (translated): BYE.
>> (translated): SLEEP WELL.
>> (translated): THANK YOU.
>> Reporter: THE MAN KNEELING BY
HER SIDE, ABOUT TO GIVE HER THE
LETHAL INJECTION, IS HER DOCTOR
FOR THE PAST TWO YEARS, DR. MARC
VAN HOEY.
DOCTOR, HOW MANY EUTHANASIAS
HAVE YOU PERFORMED YOURSELF?
>> MORE THAN 100 IN 12 YEARS'
TIME, I THINK.
>> Reporter: DR. VAN HOEY IS A
GENERAL PRACTITIONER AND
PRESIDENT OF ONE OF THE LEADING
RIGHT-TO-DIE ORGANIZATIONS IN
BELGIUM.
HE'S HELPED SHAPED THE COUNTRY'S
POLICY TOWARDS EUTHANASIA, WHICH
CAN BE REQUESTED BY PATIENTS WHO
MEET TWO BASIC CONDITIONS: THEY
ARE EXPERIENCING "CONSTANT AND
UNBEARABLE" SUFFERING, EITHER
MENTAL OR PHYSICAL; AND THEIR
CONDITION IS "INCURABLE."
AND THEN, PATIENTS MUST PUT
THEIR REQUEST IN WRITING.
>> ONLY THING YOU HAVE TO WRITE
DOWN IS YOUR NAME, THE DATE AND
"I WANT EUTHANASIA," AND
SIGNATURE.
>> Reporter: IN THE FEW AMERICAN
STATES WITH LAWS ON THE BOOKS
ALLOWING THIS, PATIENTS MUST
TAKE THE LIFE-ENDING DRUGS
THEMSELVES...
>> I WILL DIE UPSTAIRS IN MY
BEDROOM THAT I SHARE WITH MY
HUSBAND.
>> Reporter: ...LIKE TERMINAL
CANCER PATIENT BRITTANY MAYNARD,
WHO RECENTLY WENT TO OREGON TO
END HER LIFE.
BUT IN BELGIUM, IT'S THE DOCTOR
WHO MUST ADMINISTER THE LETHAL
DOSE, USUALLY AN INJECTION.
>> I START WITH SOME... IT'S A
NARCOTIC DRUG IN A HIGHER DOSE,
TO CREATE A DEEP SLEEP.
AND THEN, LATER ON, WE GIVE
BARBITURATE IN A SHOT.
IF YOU USE AN INTRAVENOUS
INJECTION AND YOU DO IT GOOD,
THE PATIENT IS DEAD IN ABOUT ONE
OR TWO MINUTES.
>> Reporter: ONE OR TWO MINUTES?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: SO IT HAPPENS VERY
QUICKLY.
>> YES, YOU HAVE A LIFE-LINE.
YOU SAY, "ARE YOU READY?
YOU WANT TO GO WITH IT?"
TILL THE VERY END, WE ASK DO YOU
WANT TO GO, BECAUSE THERE'S NO
WAY BACK.
THEN WE GIVE THE INJECTION, AND
(WHISTLES) IT'S GONE.
>> Reporter: YOU TALK ABOUT ALL
THIS VERY MATTER-OF-FACTLY.
>> I'M QUITE USED TO TALK ABOUT
ASSISTED DYING AND SO ON.
IT'S PART OF MY JOB.
>> Reporter: THAT'S RIGHT.
IN BELGIUM, IT CAN BE PART OF A
DOCTOR'S JOB TO END A PATIENT'S
LIFE.
IT'S BEEN THE LAW SINCE 2002.
BELGIUM HAS THE MOST LIBERAL
EUTHANASIA LAW IN THE WORLD.
AND EVEN THOUGH THIS COUNTRY IS
PREDOMINANTLY ROMAN CATHOLIC,
SURVEYS SHOW OVERWHELMING
SUPPORT HERE FOR THE RIGHT TO
DIE BY EUTHANASIA.
SINCE THE LAW PASSED, THE NUMBER
OF BELGIANS CHOOSING EUTHANASIA
HAS STEADILY RISEN EACH YEAR,
WITH MORE THAN 1,800 DYING THIS
WAY IN 2013.
THAT'S AN AVERAGE OF ABOUT FIVE
PEOPLE A DAY.
IN 2014, BELGIUM MADE HEADLINES
WHEN IT BECAME THE FIRST COUNTRY
IN THE WORLD TO EXTEND
EUTHANASIA TO TERMINALLY ILL
CHILDREN OF ANY AGE, ALTHOUGH NO
CASES HAVE OCCURRED SO FAR.
SO, IN BELGIUM, IT'S NOT JUST
THE TERMINALLY ILL WHO CAN
REQUEST EUTHANASIA.
PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS, NOW
CHILDREN.
IS BELGIUM PUSHING THE
BOUNDARIES WHEN IT COMES TO
EUTHANASIA?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Reporter: GILLES GENICOT IS A
LAWYER AND CO-CHAIRMAN OF THE
EUTHANASIA CONTROL AND
EVALUATION COMMISSION, WHICH
OVERSEES THE PRACTICE IN
BELGIUM.
>> THE LAW HUMANIZES THE DEATHS
OF TERMINALLY ILL PATIENTS, ON
THE ONE HAND; AND ON THE OTHER
HAND, FOR PATIENTS WHO ARE NOT
TERMINALLY ILL BUT WHO ARE
COMPLETELY HOPELESS, THERE IS A
RESPECT TO THE INDIVIDUAL
AUTONOMY.
I THINK IT'S A MAJOR ADVANCE IN
THE WAY SOCIETY, LAW AND
PHILOSOPHY SEE THIS VERY
IMPORTANT ISSUE.
>> Reporter: THE 16-PERSON
EUTHANASIA COMMISSION-- HALF
DOCTORS, HALF LAWYERS-- MEETS
EVERY MONTH IN BRUSSELS.
BY LAW, AFTER PERFORMING
EUTHANASIA, DOCTORS MUST FILE A
REPORT WITH THE COMMISSION
DETAILING WHAT THEY DID AND WHY.
THE COMMISSION REVIEWS THE
REPORTS TO BE SURE CONDITIONS
SET BY THE LAW WERE MET.
IF NOT, GENICOT SAYS, IN THE
WORST CASE, A DOCTOR COULD FACE
HOMICIDE CHARGES.
THE REPORTS MUST ALSO AFFIRM THE
PATIENT'S REQUEST FOR EUTHANASIA
WAS VOLUNTARY AND THAT TWO
DOCTORS HAD APPROVED IT, THREE
DOCTORS IN THE CASE OF
PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS.
THESE ARE ALL EUTHANASIA CASES
FROM THE LAST FEW YEARS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: GENICOT'S OFFICE IS
FILLED WITH REPORTS OF PAST AND
FUTURE CASES...
>> IT'S THE CURRENT BOX.
>> Reporter: ...AND HE SAYS THE
SYSTEM WORKS WELL, GIVING
DOCTORS A PRACTICAL AND HUMANE
WAY TO HELP SUFFERING PATIENTS
DIE PEACEFULLY.
GENICOT SAYS SOME DOCTORS CHOOSE
TO DESCRIBE THAT IN AN OPTIONAL
SECTION OF THE REPORT.
>> VERY, VERY OFTEN, IT'S TO
EXPRESS HOW SERENE, PEACEFUL AND
QUICK THE PROCEDURE WAS; THAT
THE PATIENT WAS GRATEFUL, SAID
THANK YOU TO THE DOCTOR AND WAS
SURROUNDED BY FAMILY AND
FRIENDS.
>> Reporter: BUT IT ISN'T ALWAYS
THAT WAY.
TOM MORTIER'S MOTHER LIEFE HAD A
PASSION FOR TRAVELING THE WORLD
BUT SUFFERED FROM A LIFETIME OF
SEVERE DEPRESSION.
DESPITE 40 YEARS OF THERAPY WITH
SEVERAL PSYCHIATRISTS AND
TREATMENT WITH ANTI-DEPRESSANTS,
SHE CONTINUED TO STRUGGLE WITH
SUICIDAL THOUGHTS AND
HOPELESSNESS.
DEEMED "INCURABLE," SHE WAS
EUTHANIZED IN A HOSPITAL IN
BRUSSELS ON APRIL 19, 2012, THE
DATE MARKED IN HER OWN
CALENDAR.
MOTHER AND SON WERE ESTRANGED AT
THE TIME, AND MORTIER DIDN'T
FIND OUT ABOUT IT UNTIL THE NEXT
DAY WHEN THE HOSPITAL CALLED HIS
HOME WITH THE NEWS.
>> YEAH, IT WAS COMPLETE SHOCK.
OF COURSE, I KNEW THAT MY MOTHER
WAS SUFFERING MENTALLY, BUT SHE
WOULD NEVER HAVE DONE IT
HERSELF.
SHE NEVER WOULD HAVE COMMITTED
SUICIDE.
I WENT TO TALK WITH THE
PHYSICIAN WHO KILLED MY MOTHER,
AND HE TOLD ME THAT HE WAS
ABSOLUTELY CERTAIN THAT MY
MOTHER DIDN'T WANT TO LIVE
ANYMORE.
AND I TOLD HIM, "HOW CAN YOU BE
ABSOLUTELY CERTAIN?"
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU SAID, "WHY
WASN'T I CONSULTED, WHY WASN'T I
INVOLVED?," WHAT WAS HIS
RESPONSE TO THAT?
>> HE SAID THAT MY MOTHER DIDN'T
WANT THE CHILDREN TO BE
CONTACTED, AND HE HAD TO FULFILL
THE WISH OF THE PATIENT.
"THE PSYCHIC SUFFERING HAS BEEN
TOO MUCH, AND I CAN'T GO ON."
>> Reporter: LETTERS MORTIER'S
MOTHER LEFT BEHIND DID LITTLE TO
HELP HIM MAKE SENSE OF HOW SHE
DIED.
BUT WASN'T IT HIS MOTHER'S
CHOICE, AND HERS ALONE, TO MAKE?
MORTIER SAYS HIS MOTHER'S
DEPRESSION CAME PARTLY FROM
BEING ESTRANGED FROM HER
CHILDREN, SO HER DOCTORS SHOULD
HAVE REACHED OUT TO HIM.
AND, HE'S CONVINCED HIS MOTHER,
SEVERELY DEPRESSED AND ON
MEDICATION, WAS NOT IN THE RIGHT
STATE OF MIND TO MAKE SUCH A
DECISION.
>> THE OPTION THAT IS BEING
OFFERED TO HER RATHER THAN
TREATMENT IS DEATH.
>> Reporter: ATTORNEY ROBERT
CLARKE WITH THE CHRISTIAN GROUP
ALLIANCE DEFENDING FREEDOM IS
NOW USING TOM MORTIER'S CASE TO
CHALLENGE BELGIUM'S EUTHANASIA
LAW IN THE EUROPEAN COURT OF
HUMAN RIGHTS, ARGUING IT
VIOLATES THE BASIC OBLIGATION OF
THE STATE TO PROTECT THE RIGHT
TO LIFE.
IF THE COURT TAKES THE CASE, AND
IF IT RULES IN MORTIER'S FAVOR--
A BIG IF-- BELGIUM COULD BE
FORCED TO REWRITE ITS LAW.
>> WHAT WE SEE IN BELGIUM IS A
SLIPPERY SLOPE.
WE... WE SEE THE NUMBER OF
EUTHANASIA DEATHS RISING YEAR
IN, YEAR OUT SINCE THE
LEGALIZATION IN 2002.
AND WHAT WE SEE IS COMPLETELY
INADEQUATE OVERSIGHT.
THE COMMITTEE THAT MONITORS THEM
HAS RECEIVED JUST OVER 8,000
NOTIFICATIONS OF EUTHANASIA
DEATHS SINCE THE LEGALIZATION.
IN ITS HISTORY, OF THOSE 8,000
CASES, THE COMMISSION HAS
REFERRED NOT A SINGLE ONE TO THE
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR.
>> Reporter: THAT'S NOT AN
INDICATION OF A FLAWLESS SYSTEM,
CLARKE SAYS, BUT INSTEAD IT
SUGGESTS THAT THE EUTHANASIA
COMMISSION'S RELIANCE ON
DOCTORS' REPORTING ALONE IS NOT
ENOUGH TO CATCH POSSIBLE ABUSES.
WE ASKED EUTHANASIA COMMISSION
CO-CHAIR GILLES GENICOT ABOUT
THAT NUMBER.
>> I CAN UNDERSTAND IT MIGHT
SOUND SURPRISING, BUT THE WAY
OUR LAW WORKS IS BASED ON TRUST
WE GIVE TO DOCTORS BECAUSE THEY
KNOW THEIR PATIENTS FAR BETTER
THAN ANYONE ELSE.
>> Reporter: GENICOT SAYS HE
THINKS DOCTORS ACTED
APPROPRIATELY IN THE CASE OF TOM
MORTIER'S MOTHER, AND THAT
MORTIER'S COMPLAINT TO THE
EUROPEAN COURT HAS NO LEGAL
STANDING.
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN OTHER
CONTROVERSIAL CASES THAT HAVE
RAISED EYEBROWS, INCLUDING: A
TRANSGENDER PATIENT WHO WAS
EUTHANIZED BECAUSE OF DEPRESSION
FOLLOWING AN UNSUCCESSFUL SEX
CHANGE OPERATION; AND TWINS WHO
WERE CHRONICALLY ILL, DEAF AND
GOING BLIND, WHO WERE EUTHANIZED
TOGETHER.
>> THOSE CASES ARE REALLY
EXTREMELY RARE, SO WE CAN
MENTION THEM, IT'S OKAY TO
DISCUSS THEM.
BUT WE SHOULD NOT BRING THEM TO
THE FRONT TO SAY... TO PUT THE
LAW INTO QUESTION BECAUSE THE
LAW IS NOT PRIMARILY MADE FOR
THESE CASES.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, DR. MARC
VAN HOEY SAYS ONLY ABOUT 5% OF
HIS CASES WERE PSYCHIATRIC
PATIENTS, BUT HE DOESN'T SHY
AWAY FROM DISCUSSING THEM.
AS HE SEES IT, EUTHANASIA CAN BE
A LESS TRAUMATIC OPTION FOR A
PATIENT AND THEIR FAMILY THAN
SOME OTHER FORM OF SUICIDE.
CAN IT BE EMOTIONAL FOR YOU?
ARE SOME CASES HARDER THAN
OTHERS?
>> IT'S ALWAYS EMOTIONAL.
AND WHAT I ALWAYS SAY TO MY
COLLEAGUES, NURSES, AND ALSO TO
THE FAMILY I TELL THIS: TRY TO
BEAR, IN MIND YOU FOLLOW THE LAW
AND IT'S THE QUESTION OF THE
PATIENT.
IDIDN'T SAY YOU HAVE TO DIE.
>> (translated): CAN YOU HEAR
ME, EVA?
>> Reporter: WHICH BRINGS US
BACK TO EVA, THE YOUNG WOMAN
CONVINCED THE ONLY WAY TO END
HER MENTAL SUFFERING WAS TO END
HER LIFE.
EVA AGREED TO BE FILMED BECAUSE
SHE BELIEVED THAT PEOPLE WITH
CHRONIC, INCURABLE PSYCHIATRIC
ILLNESS CAN BE HELPED TO DIE
WITH DIGNITY.
ABOUT TWO MINUTES AFTER
RECEIVING THE LETHAL INJECTION
FROM DR. VAN HOEY, EVA DIED.
THE LAST THING FOR DR. VAN HOEY
TO DO WAS FILL OUT THE PAPERWORK
REQUIRED FOR THE COMMISSION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S YOUR TAKE
ON BELGIUM'S EUTHANASIA LAW THAT
EXTENDS THE RIGHT TO DIE TO
CHILDREN?
PARTICIPATE IN OUR ONLINE POLL
AT newshour.pbs.org.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU," YOUR
COMMENTS ABOUT SOME OF OUR
RECENT WORK.
THIS WEEK, YOUR RESPONSE TO TWO
EXTENDED INTERVIEWS WE DID
EXPLORING THE OFTEN TENSE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MINORITY
COMMUNITIES AND THE POLICE.
THERE WAS THIS FROM REED MORE:
"SORRY, BUT AS A WHITE FEMALE
THAT GREW UP IN A LARGE CITY, MY
PARENTS TOLD ME IN MY TEEN YEARS
TO BE CAREFUL OF HOW I ACTED
AROUND POLICE OR ANYONE WITH A
GUN.
YOU MESS WITH ANYONE HOLDING A
GUN WHO REGULARLY HAS TO DEAL
WITH PEOPLE WHO ARE VIOLENT,
BLACK OR WHITE, YOU LACK COMMON
SENSE."
AND FROM ROLLIN WATSON WALKER:
"HOPEFULLY, WE'VE LEARNED THAT
UNACCEPTABLE BEHAVIOR IS
UNACCEPTABLE NO MATTER WHAT
COLOR YOU ARE."
ROB BIESER SAID: "I OFTEN WONDER
WHAT OFFICERS OF COLOR THINK AND
FEEL ABOUT THE DEMONSTRATIONS
AGAINST POLICE VIOLENCE TOWARDS
PEOPLE OF COLOR.
IT MUST BE A HORRIBLE AND
UNCOMFORTABLE POSITION FOR
THEM!"
MARCUS LANDON ADDED: "'RESPECT
AND SERVE' IS THE CREDO THEY
SHOULD ACTUALLY FOLLOW!
WAY TOO MANY COPS ARE ON A POWER
TRIP.
MY BEST FRIEND IS A RETIRED
N.Y.P.D. DETECTIVE, AND HE
AGREES WITH ME BUT ADMITS HE
CAN'T SAY IT AS COPS STICK
TOGETHER NO MATTER WHAT!"
AND FROM ULFUR: "THE POLICE
THINK THERE ARE JUST THREE KINDS
OF PEOPLE: COPS, CRIMINALS AND
VICTIMS.
NO TAXPAYERS, CITIZENS, VOTERS,
FATHERS, MOTHERS OR CHILDREN.
THEY HAVE AN 'US AGAINST THE
WORLD' MENTALITY.
NOW THEY ARE FINDING OUT WHAT IT
IS REALLY LIKE TO BE OPPOSED BY
MOST OF THE CITIZENS THEY
POLICE."
MINDFULL SAID: "WE NEED TO FIND
RESOURCES TO ADDRESS POVERTY,
WHICH WILL PROTECT OUR POLICE
OFFICERS AND FREE THEM UP TO
FIGHT REAL CRIME INSTEAD OF
CHASING TEENS AROUND THE STREETS
FOR MINOR OFFENSES AND TYING UP
OUR COURTS WITH POOR PEOPLE."
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
LEAVE THEM ON OUR FACEBOOK PAGE,
ONLINE AT newshour.pbs.org, OR
TWEET US @NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
A MUSLIM MAN WHO HELPED SAVE
JEWS DURING A RECENT TERROR
ATTACK IN PARIS WILL BE GRANTED
FRENCH CITIZENSHIP NEXT WEEK.
LASSANA BATHILY OF MALI GUIDED
15 JEWS INTO A DOWNSTAIRS
FREEZER AFTER GUNMAN TOOK
HOSTAGES AT A KOSHER MARKET.
THE GUNMAN, AN ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST, KILLED FOUR OTHER
JEWS THERE.
NEW YORK GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO
IS REPORTEDLY PLANNING A TRADE
MISSION TO CUBA, AND A
CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION LED BY
VERMONT SENATOR PATRICK LEAHY
LEFT FOR CUBA TODAY.
ALL THIS FOLLOWING THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S DECISION TO
EASE RESTRICTIONS IN DEALINGS
WITH THE ISLAND NATION.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW.